Add 'sandwich tests' chapter (#24)
melange-re/melange-for-react-devs: docs/sandwich-tests/index.md

# Sandwich Tests

One day over drinks at the local bar, Madame Jellobutter tearfully recounts to
you how her previous venture, Unicorn BBQ, failed in part because of a terribly
buggy and crashy website. It was so traumatizing that she still has nightmares
about that website to this day! After the conversation, you decide to write some
unit tests.

## Install `melange-fest` via opam

After asking around in the `#melange` channel of the [Reason Discord
chatroom](https://melange.re/v3.0.0/community.html#community), you get a
recommendation from user MonadicFanatic1984 to try out
[melange-fest](https://github.com/ahrefs/melange-fest), a library that allows
you to write tests in OCaml and run them in [Node test
runner](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#test-runner). You decide to give it a
shot!

Run this from your project's root directory:

```shell
opam install melange-fest
```

Once that finishes, run `opam list` to see all the opam packages you've

> installed in your *opam switch* (more on that later). Scroll down to the entry

Reviewer: I thought opam switches had been introduced before, but it's not the case 😮

Author: I try not to bring anything up until it's actually needed

> for `melange-fest` and you should see something like this:

Reviewer: To avoid scrolling, user can just run `opam list melange-fest`.

Author: True, but I wanted to also make the point that `opam list` is a way to see all the packages that are installed in the current switch

dependencies when we run `opam install . --deps-only`[^1] (this is already done
for you when you run `npm run init`).

## Opam switch

An [opam switch](https://ocaml.org/docs/opam-switch-introduction) is an isolated
OCaml environment. In this book, we only use [local
switches](https://opam.ocaml.org/blog/opam-local-switches/), which are similar
to Node project directories[^2]. You can list all the opam switches on your
computer by running

```shell
opam switch
```

The output will look something like this:

```
#  switch                     compiler                   description
→  ~/melange-for-react-devs   ocaml-base-compiler.5.1.1  ~/melange-for-react-devs
   default                    ocaml.5.1.0                default

[NOTE] Current switch has been selected based on the current directory.
       The current global system switch is default.
```

As implied by `[NOTE]`, you don't need to manually set the opam switch for your
project, the switch is set based on your current working directory[^3].

## First test

Add a new file `src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.re` and add a simple test
to it:

<<< SandwichTests.re#first-test

You should get this error:

```

> File "docs/burger-tests/SandwichTests.re", line 2, characters 0-9:

Reviewer: Above it says `order-confirmation` folder, but here it says `burger-test`.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/24/commits/357eb291c13fbda4d4e65644c0d379b9e5bc71c5

2 | Fest.test("Item.Sandwich.toEmoji", () =>
    ^^^^^^^^^
Error: Unbound module Fest
```

In order to use a library, you must add it to the `libraries` field of the
`melange.emit` stanza in your `dune` file:

```clj{3}
(melange.emit
 (target output)

>  (libraries reason-react melange-fest)

Reviewer: Is it better to use the simple highlight, or would it help to show this as a diff?

```diff
- (libraries reason-react)
+ (libraries reason-react melange-fest)
```

Author: Good point, used diff here and in a couple other places: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/24/commits/5eb71abe15ea913e1df77be3b5eddcc2ad5b7e8b

time.

The easiest way to save typing is by using a module alias:

<<< SandwichTests.re#module-alias

However, because `SandwichTests` is a module for tests and `Fest` only contains
testing-related functions, it's reasonable to
[open](https://reasonml.github.io/docs/en/module#opening-modules) the `Fest`
module and make all its functions available inside the scope of the
`SandwichTests` module:

<<< SandwichTests.re#open-fest

::: warning

In most cases, `open` should not be used at the toplevel of a module. It usually
makes more sense to use a [local
open](https://reasonml.github.io/docs/en/module#local-opens) which makes
all the functions of the opened module available inside the scope of a function
or submodule.

:::

## Compile with `.mjs` extension

Now that your `SandwichTests.re` compiles, try running the outputted `.js` file
in Node:

```shell
node _build/default/src/order-confirmation/output/src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.js
```

You'll probably see this error:

```
(node:68498) Warning: To load an ES module, set "type": "module" in the package.json or use the .mjs extension.
(Use `node --trace-warnings ...` to show where the warning was created)

> /home/fhsu/work/melange-for-react-devs/_build/default/src/order-confirmation/output/src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.js:3

Reviewer: Maybe this path could be simplified to `~/melange-for-react-devs-template/_build...` as we told users to download the template in the first steps of the book.

Author: I looked around, and I'm not at all consistent about what paths I use in the book. Given that it's not just a problem in this chapter, I'll address this in a separate PR.

  </head>
  <body>
    <div id="root"></div>
  </body>
</html>
```

## Run tests through Dune

It's a good idea to let Dune [run your
tests](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tests.html), because Dune will
optimize your test runs by only running the tests that need to run. In addition,
Dune can conveniently execute all your tests with a single command:

```shell
opam exec -- dune build @melange @runtest
```

This tells Dune to build everything that has the aliases `@melange` and
`@runtest`. In Dune, an
[alias](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/aliases.html) is a build
target that doesn't correspond to a specific file. In practice, it's a way to
group related stanzas under a common name. When we refer to aliases, we write an
`@` in front of them, because that's how they're referenced on the command line.
[By default](https://melange.re/v3.0.0/build-system.html#building-the-project),
all `melange.emit` stanzas are attached to the `@melange` alias.

To save ourselves from having to type the above command repeatedly, add a new
npm script to `package.json`:

```json

> "test": "npm run build -- @runtest --no-buffer"

Author: @jchavarri I think it makes sense to make another script for `watch-test`. wydt?

Reviewer: Sounds good!

# Sandwich Tests

One day over drinks at the local bar, Madame Jellobutter tearfully recounts to

> you how her previous venture, Unicorn BBQ, failed in part because of a terribly

Reviewer: 😆

buggy and crashy website. It was so traumatizing that she still has nightmares
about that website to this day! After the conversation, you decide to write some
unit tests.

## Install `melange-fest` via opam

After asking around in the `#melange` channel of the [Reason Discord
chatroom](https://melange.re/v3.0.0/community.html#community), you get a
recommendation from user MonadicFanatic1984 to try out
[melange-fest](https://github.com/jchavarri/melange-fest), a library that allows
you to write tests in OCaml and run them in [Node test
runner](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#test-runner). You decide to give it a
shot!

Run this from your project's root directory:

```shell

> opam install melange-fest

Reviewer: Should we use `opam pin` here? So the chapter doesn't get blocked on us releasing `melange-fest` in opam.

Or I can release a version 0.1 after next week...

Edit: oh, i saw the warning a few lines below.

Author: melange-fest removed from pin-depends in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/24/commits/194f93ddc69a3409ef4a40ee3ccf5a319eb8e74c

```

Once that finishes, run `opam list` to see all the opam packages you've
installed in your *opam switch* (more on that later). Scroll down to the entry
for `melange-fest` and you should see something like this:

```
melange-fest    0.1.0   A minimal test framework for Melange using Node test runner
```

Open `melange-for-react-devs.opam` and add a corresponding entry in the
`depends` section for `melange-fest`:

```
depends: [
  "ocaml" {>= "5.1.1"}
  "reason" {>= "3.10.0"}
  "dune" {>= "3.8"}
  "melange" {>= "3.0.0-51"}
  "reason-react" {>= "0.14.0"}
  "reason-react-ppx" {>= "0.14.0"}
  "opam-check-npm-deps" {with-test} # todo: use with-dev-setup once opam 2.2 is out
  "ocaml-lsp-server" {with-test} # todo: use with-dev-setup once opam 2.2 is out
  "dot-merlin-reader" {with-test} # todo: use with-dev-setup once opam 2.2 is out
  "odoc" {with-doc}

>   "melange-fest" {>= "0.1"} // [!code ++]

Reviewer: what is `code++`?

Author: It's a special highlight comment that is colored green (implying that it's a line that was added). It always works regardless of what syntax is being used.

]
```

Note that the version number might not be `0.1` when you run `opam list`. If
it's different, just use that version number instead.

Now if we want to install this project on another computer, we don't need to
manually install `melange-fest`; it will be installed along with all the other
dependencies when we run `opam install . --deps-only`[^1] (this is already done for
you when you run `npm run init`).

::: warning

Currently, `melange-fest` isn't yet available in the [opam package
repository](https://opam.ocaml.org/packages/), but this will be fixed soon.

:::

## Opam switch

An [opam switch](https://ocaml.org/docs/opam-switch-introduction) is an isolated
OCaml environment, similar to Python's

> [virtualenv](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/)[^2]. You can list all the opam switches on

Reviewer: Can we establish some analogy with `npm run`? In the way that the scripts installed in `node_modules/.bin` become available through that command 🤔 

The reason is that I'm not sure how many readers will be familiar with Python virtual env (I am not, for example).

Author: I mention Python's virtualenv not because I think readers will be familiar with it, but to establish that it's conceptually different from an npm project folder. I added a footnote to try to clarify.

Author: I ended up removing the reference to Python virtualenv

your computer by running

```shell
opam switch
```

The output will look something like this:

```
#  switch                     compiler                   description
→  ~/melange-for-react-devs   ocaml-base-compiler.5.1.1  ~/melange-for-react-devs
   default                    ocaml.5.1.0                default

[NOTE] Current switch has been selected based on the current directory.
       The current global system switch is default.
```

As implied by `[NOTE]`, you don't need to manually set the opam switch for your
project, the switch is set based on your current working directory[^3].

## First test

Add a new file `src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.re` and add a simple test
to it:

<<< SandwichTests.re#first-test

You should get this error:

```
File "docs/burger-tests/SandwichTests.re", line 2, characters 0-9:
2 | Fest.test("Item.Sandwich.toEmoji", () =>
    ^^^^^^^^^
Error: Unbound module Fest
```

In order to use a library, you must add it to the `libraries` field of the
`melange.emit` stanza in your `dune` file:

> ```clj{3}

Reviewer: Why the `clj{3}` syntax?

Author: clj is short for clojure. Because Clojure uses s-expressions as well, using it for Dune gives decent highlighting. I could also add dune as a syntax if I provide the grammar file like I did with Reason. Do you think I should do it?

Author: I think I'll just go ahead and add dune syntax from https://github.com/ocamllabs/vscode-ocaml-platform/blob/master/syntaxes/dune.json in a separate PR, it's quite easy to do and avoids possible confusion from readers who wonder what `clj` refers to.

Reviewer: It's not a big deal, I was just curious. :)

/home/fhsu/work/melange-for-react-devs/_build/default/src/order-confirmation/output/src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.js:3
import * as Assert from "assert";
^^^^^^

SyntaxError: Cannot use import statement outside a module
```

Recent versions of Node support [ECMAScript
modules](https://nodejs.org/api/esm.html#introduction), but Node uses [CommonJS
modules](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#modules-commonjs-modules) by
default. Node automatically treats `.mjs` files as ECMAScript modules, so you
can change the `module_systems` field of your `melange.emit` stanza to use the
`.mjs` extension:

```clj{6}
(melange.emit
 (target output)
 (libraries reason-react melange-fest)
 (preprocess
  (pps melange.ppx reason-react-ppx))
 (module_systems (es6 mjs))
 (runtime_deps
  (glob_files *.css)))
```

Now rebuild and run the test on the newly-generated `SandwichTests.mjs` file:

```shell
npm run build
node _build/default/src/order-confirmation/output/src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.mjs
```

The tests should run successfully this time!

Since you've changed the extension of your generated JavaScript files to `.mjs`,

> you must also change the reference in `src/order-confirmation/index.html`:

Reviewer: Did you consider using a separate `melange.emit` stanza for the tests? That way, the web part and the tests don't interact with each other (e.g. here the `index.html` file shouldn't be changed because the extension on that `melange.emit` stanza would be preserved).

Author: The original version of the code did use a separate `melange.emit` stanza but this is already a long chapter so I'll cover it in the next chapter. Just to confirm, is this the right way to do it?

- Create a new folder `src/sandwich-tests/item` containing Item.re and put a dune file in it with `lib` stanza naming the library `item`
- Create a new folder `src/sandwich-tests/tests` containing SandwichTests.re and put a dune file with `melange.emit` stanze in it, with `library` field that has `item` as the value
- In the dune file in `src/sandwich-tests`, add `library` field with `item` as the value

Author: I no longer have test rules, do I still need to worry about this?

Reviewer: The test rules are unrelated to this conversation, it's about having a single melange.emit stanza or two. The "issue" with a single stanza is that changes to it (like in this case, changing the extension) affect both tests and website.

However, having multiple emit stanzas also has downsides: they might lead to more complicated paths if they are placed in subfolders. To mitigate this, the best would be to place them in the same folder and use `modules` to choose which modules in the folder belong to each stanza. In other words, place two `melange.emit` stanzas in `src/sandwich-tests/dune`. See `modules` docs in https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/melange.html#melange-emit.

tests](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tests.html), because Dune will
optimize your test runs by only running the tests that need to run. In addition,
Dune can conveniently execute all your tests with a single command:

```shell
opam exec -- dune build @melange @runtest
```

This tells Dune to build everything that has the aliases `@melange` and
`@runtest`. In Dune, an
[alias](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/aliases.html) is a build
target that doesn't correspond to a specific file. In practice, it's a way to
group related stanzas under a common name. When we refer to aliases, we write an
`@` in front of them, because that's how they're referenced on the command line.
[By default](https://melange.re/v3.0.0/build-system.html#building-the-project),
all `melange.emit` stanzas are attached to the `@melange` alias.

To save ourselves from having to type the above command repeatedly, add a new
npm script to `package.json`:

```json
"test": "npm run build -- @runtest --no-buffer"
```

We don't need to include the `@melange` alias in this script because it's
already referenced in the `build` script. We add `--no-buffer` at the end of the

> command so that the output from Node test runner will retain its colors.

Reviewer: I am not sure this is the right way to implement this dependency. The way it's being done, we are tracking the dep between the test and the `@melange` alias through npm scripts, but this should be tracked in Dune directly.

The tests depend on the `melange` alias, but we can reflect this in the `rule` that is explained below, e.g.:

```
(rule
 (alias runtest)
 (deps (alias melange))
 (action
  (run node ./output/src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.mjs)))
```

Then, optionally (because it doesn't matter if we call redundantly `dune build @melange @runtest`), the npm script shouldn't reuse the `build` script, but rather define its own:

```
"test": "npm run dune -- build @runtest --no-buffer",
```

This way, we preserve the source of truth for the dependencies in Dune, and keep npm scripts as a thin layer on top.

Author: No longer relevant, as the test rules have been removed

## Add `rule` for running tests

Right now, running `npm run test` won't run any tests, because we first need to
add a [rule stanza](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/dune-files.html#rule)
which runs the code generated from `SandwichTests.re`. Add this to your
`src/order-confirmation/dune` file:

```clj
(rule
 (alias runtest)
 (action

>   (run time node ./output/src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.mjs)))

Reviewer: Can remove `time` from here:

```suggestion
  (run node ./output/src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.mjs)))
```

```

Breaking it down:

- [`rule`](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/dune-files.html#rule) is a
  stanza that "tells Dune how to generate a specific set of files from a
  specific set of dependencies". While this is technically correct, in this
  case, no files are generated and what we are really interested in is the side
  effects of the `action` field (described below).

> - `(alias runtest)` attaches this rule to the alias `@runtest`

Reviewer: Maybe can explain here that aliases are another kind of target (like file names). So we can call:

```
dune build ./path/to/foo.exe
```

or 

```
dune build @some_alias
```

- [`action`](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/actions/index.html)
  is a required field of the `rule` stanza and is used to run commands.
  - The
    [`run`](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/actions/run.html)
    field is used to execute a program. In this case, it runs `node` on the
    `SandwichTests.mjs` file and `time`s how long it takes.
  - The default working directory for a rule is the mirrored directory in
    `_build` that corresponds to the directory where the rule is located. Since
    this rule is defined in `src/order-confirmation/dune`, the working directory
    for it is `_build/default/src/order-confirmation`. Therefore the full path
    of the file is

    ```

>     _build/default/src/order-confirmation/output/src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.mjs

Reviewer: There is more information about how these paths are build in https://melange.re/v3.0.0/build-system.html#javascript-artifacts-layout.

    ```

Run `npm run test` to see your test being run through Dune.

::: tip

Rules are the true building blocks of Dune. A stanza like `melange.emit` is
really just shorthand for a series of related rules. See [The Dune Mental
Model](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/explanation/mental-model.html) for
a good explanation of this.

:::

## `deps` field

Change `SandwichTests.re` so that the test fails:

<<< SandwichTests.re#broken-test

Run `npm run test` again and... nothing happens. Dune won't re-run the test
because we didn't add any dependencies to our rule. We need to add a
`deps` field:

```clj{3-5,7}
(rule
 (alias runtest)
 (deps
  Item.re

>   (:input ./output/src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.mjs))

Reviewer: Unfortunately, this needs to be `(deps (alias melange))`, we can't specify individual modules like this, otherwise it will eventually break, because we'll be missing intermediate artifacts that `SandwichTests.mjs` might need, like `cmj` generated from other modules.

Author: I read your other [comment](https://github.com/ahrefs/melange-fest/pull/7#discussion_r1511557725), and I want to confirm that it doesn't need to be `(deps (alias_rec melange))`

Reviewer: Yes, `alias_rec` ftw.

 (action
  (run time node %{input})))
```

This `deps` field has two values:

- `Item.re` makes the rule depend on the `Item.re` file. This means that if
  `Item.re` changes after the last successful test run, then running `npm run
  test` will cause this test rule to run its `action` again.
- `(:input ./output/src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.mjs)` defines a new
  [variable](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/concepts/variables.html#variables)
  named `input` and binds it to the path

>   `./output/src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.mjs`.

Reviewer: This can all be simplified.

Author: This whole section has been deleted

Inside the action, we can reference the variable using `%{input}` (the name of
the variable `input` enclosed by `%{` and `}`).

See [Dependency
Specification](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/concepts/dependency-spec.html)
for the full lowdown on dependencies in Dune.

We didn't have to use a variable here, but the alternative would've been to
write the same path two times:

```clj{5,7}
(rule
 (alias runtest)
 (deps
  Item.re
  ./output/src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.mjs)
 (action
  (run time node ./output/src/order-confirmation/SandwichTests.mjs)))
```

Run `npm run test` to see that your test runs. It fails, but you can fix it and
run `npm run test` again. After the test succeeds, running `npm run test` won't
cause any tests to run until either `Item.re` or `SandwichTests.mjs` is
changed.

---

> Subarashii! You now have a module for testing sandwich-related logic. In the

Reviewer: 😄 I love Japanese, but should Madame Jellobutter stick with French-originated exclamations? ("Merveilleux"?)

Author: This isn't Madame Jellobutter speaking. There are 3 characters in this book: (1) Madame Jellobutter, (2) "You", an unnamed coder who is a proxy for the reader, and (3) the unnamed omniscient narrator, who I like to call the Melange Fairy. The Melange Fairy sits on "Your" shoulder and tells them everything they need to know about Melange and naturally is fluent in all human languages.

The backstory of the Melange Fairy is that they are an advanced AI sent from the future to save humanity and teaching "you" Melange is the first step in that plan. Maybe this will be slowly explained over the course of the book, or maybe it won't be.

    can use it
- `melange-fest` is a testing library that allows you write tests in OCaml and
  run them in Node test runner
- You can `open` a module to make all its functions available in the current
  scope
- Set the value of `module_systems` to `(es6 mjs)` to make Melange generate
  `.mjs` files that are treated by Node as ECMASCript modules
- Dune has built-in support for tests
  - Execute all tests by running `opam exec -- dune build @runtest`
  - Only re-run succeeding tests when dependencies changed since the last time
    the test was run
- The `rule` stanza can be used to specify your tests
  - Use the `alias` field to attach the rule to the `@runtest` alias
  - Use the `deps` field to specify the dependencies for the rule
    - Use variables inside `deps` so you don't have to type a path twice
  - Use the `action` field to specify the command that launches the test

## Solutions

<b>1.</b> A comprehensive test of `Item.Sandwich.toEmoji` might look like this:

<<< SandwichTests.re#test-to-emoji

<b>2.</b> The `rule` stanza for `BurgerTests.re` is very similar to the existing
rule we have for `SandwichTests.re`:

```clj
(rule
 (alias runtest)
 (deps
  Item.re

>   (:input ./output/src/order-confirmation/BurgerTests.mjs))

Reviewer: Same comments as above (has to be `(alias melange)`)

 (action

>   (run time node %{input})))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (run node %{input})))
```

```

<b>3.</b> A comprehensive test of `Item.Sandwich.toPrice` for Turducken
sandwiches might look like this:

<<< SandwichTests.re#test-to-price

-----

View [source
code](https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/blob/main/src/sandwich-tests/)
and [demo](https://react-book.melange.re/demo/src/sandwich-tests/) for this chapter.

-----

[^1]: The `--deps-only` option tells `opam install` to only install the
    dependencies and not the package. When you're developing an application and
    not a library, there is no package associated with your project.

[^2]: In this book, we only use opam's [local
    switches](https://opam.ocaml.org/blog/opam-local-switches/), which are in
    practice similar to Node project directories containing a `package.json`
    file. But in general, an opam switch doesn't have to be associated with a

>     project directory.

Reviewer: These are called "global" switches, as opposed to "local" (not sure it's worth mentioning)

Author: I added a mention of local switches, didn't mention global switches

> [^3]: A shell hook is responsible for setting the current opam switch depending
>     on what directory you're in. The shell hook is typically installed when you
>     run `opam init`. Just respond with `y` when it asks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^3]: A shell hook is responsible for setting an opam local switch as current if it
exists in the directory you are "`cd`-ing" into. The shell hook is typically installed
when you run `opam init`. Just respond with `y` when it asks
```

Author: Clarified in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/24/commits/831b151597e844d613fa823110a52d166592fad8
